--- PAGE 1 ---
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 4, AUGUST 2024 4383
Mobility-Aware MEC Planning With a GNN-Based
Graph Partitioning Framework
Jiayi Liu ,Member, IEEE , Zhongyi Xu, Chen Wang, Xuefang Liu, Xuemei Xie ,Senior Member, IEEE ,
and Guangming Shi ,Fellow, IEEE
Abstract —Mobile service continuity is essential important
to ensure that user sessions and services will survive usermobility. The 5G enhances its mobility management by providingthe ﬂexibility and offering three types of Session and ServiceContinuity (SSC) modes to address various service continuityrequirements. Multi-access edge computing (MEC) is a typeof widely adopted network architecture that delivers networkservices from the boundary of the mobile network by provisioninga set of edge servers. Determining an optimum planning ofMEC edge servers, which involves determining edge serversappropriate geographical positions and their serving areas, is aprecondition for more efﬁcient service provisioning and better
usage of network resources. In this work, we investigate the
MEC servers planning problem by considering the managementcost for maintaining MEC service continuity. The problem isformulated as a graph partitioning problem to partition the RANgraph with minimum SSC management costs and balanced MECservers workloads. Then, we adapt a generalizable approximateGraph Partitioning framework which leverages on Graph NeuralNetwork (GNN) to embed the RAN network spacial featureand on Multilayer Perceptron (MLP) for graph partitioning.Based on the framework, we propose a MEC server planningalgorithm named MECP-GAP. Finally, we evaluate MECP-GAPwith extensive simulations and real network data. Comparing toseveral baselines, MECP-GAP achieves better performance withlower running time.
Index Terms —Mobile edge computing, edge server planning,
mobility management, graph neural network, learning-basedframework.
I. I NTRODUCTION
AMOBILE network is a complex wireless communication
system that provides seamless connectivity and efﬁcient
communication for mobile devices. The mobile networkingtechnology has been developed for decades, and it is playing
Manuscript received 10 April 2024; accepted 5 June 2024. Date of
publication 11 June 2024; date of current version 21 August 2024. The
associate editor coordinating the review of this article and approving it forpublication was M. Shojafar. (Corresponding author: Jiayi Liu.)
Jiayi Liu is with the Guangzhou Institute of Technology, Xidian University,
Guangzhou 510530, China, and also with Pazhou Laboratory (Huangpu),
Guangzhou 510530, China. (e-mail: jyliu@xidian.edu.cn).
Zhongyi Xu and Xuefang Liu are with the School of Telecommunication,
Xidian University, Xi’an 710071, China.
Chen Wang is with the Noah’s Ark Lab, Huawei, Shenzhen 518129, China.
Xuemei Xie is with the School of Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Xidian
University, Xi’an 710071, China, and also with Pazhou Laboratory (Huangpu),Guangzhou 510530, China.
Guangming Shi is with the School of Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Xidian
University, Xi’an 710071, China, also with Pazhou Laboratory (Huangpu),Guangzhou 510530, China, and also with Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen
518066, China.
Digital Object Identiﬁer 10.1109/TNSM.2024.3412959an increasingly important role in the ﬁeld of daily life and
industrial production. Since the ﬁrst-generation (1G) mobile
network, mobile networking has evolved signiﬁcantly and each
generation represents signiﬁcant technological improvements.For each generation of mobile network, mobility management
is one of the fundamental functionalities that enables effective
services delivers and maintains connections towards mobileusers on the move [1]. The 3GPP 5G network also supports
the mobility management functions with enhancements in user
state management, handover and cell reselection, and Sessionand Service Continuity (SSC) [2]. The mobile data service
is the fundamental service type in the 5G, hence service
continuity has attracted more concern to ensure that user
sessions will survive movements, and the 5G provides the
ﬂexibility by offering three types of SSC modes to addressvarious service continuity requirements.
Multi-access edge computing (MEC) is a type of network
architecture that delivers network services from the boundaryof the mobile network by provisioning a set of geographically
distributed edge servers at the edge of the network. MEC
has been widely adopted to enhance the performance ofvarious network services, such as mobile content delivery [3],
smart city [4], Vehicle-to-Everything (V2X) applications [5],
etc. For deploying an MEC system, determining an optimumplanning of MEC edge servers is a fundamental precondition
for more efﬁcient service provisioning and better usage of
network resources [6]. The planning of MEC edge servers
refers to the determination of (1) the optimal locations for
MEC edge servers, and (2) the appropriate MEC edge servers
serving areas, which has attracted wide attention in recent
years. These two problems are tightly coupled, and the serving
area determination is essential, based on which the locationdetermination problem can be reduced into ﬁnding the centroid
within the serving area.
In[7], the authors introduce a framework to jointly optimize
the placement of MEC servers and User Plane Functions
(UPF) in a dynamic network environment. They formulate
the problem as Integer Linear Programming (ILP) and utilizea scheduling technique based on Optimal Stopping Theory
(OST) to decide the optimal reconﬁguration time. In [8],
the authors jointly consider edge server deployment andservice placement to maximize the overall proﬁt of the MEC
system. They propose a two-step method including a clustering
algorithm and nonlinear programming to solve the formulatedproblem. In [6], the authors formulate the MEC edge servers
placement problem with dynamic uncertain resource demands
1932-4537 c/circlecopyrt2024 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: POLO BIBLIOTECARIO DI INGEGNERIA. Downloaded on December 13,2024 at 14:57:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

--- PAGE 2 ---
4384 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 4, AUGUST 2024
through an uncertain programming formulation, and a deep-
learning based algorithm is proposed to practically solve theproblem. In [9], the authors formulate the edge server place-
ment problem as a capacitated location allocation problem
and provide an algorithm for effective solutions. In [10],
the authors study the MEC server placement in smart cities.
They formulate the problem as a multi-objective constraint
optimization problem and adopt mixed integer programmingto ﬁnd the optimal solution.
However, MEC edge servers are provisioned to provide
network services, and none of the above works consider theoptimization of MEC servers planning in terms of minimizing
the management costs in providing service continuity for
moving users. Moreover, existing works are based on tradi-
tional model-based methods which formulate and solve the
MEC server planning problem as an optimization problem.With the development of Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) tech-
nology, machine learning-based methods are widely applied
in various domains, including network optimization [11].
Comparing to the traditional model-based optimization meth-
ods, machine learning are model-free and data-driven, which
could explore the intrinsic inner relationships between com-plex system parameters and possible to discover better
solutions. Hence, in this current work, we aim to investigate
the MEC servers planning problem by considering the man-agement cost for maintaining MEC service continuity with
machine learning-based methods . Speciﬁcally, we focus on the
MEC edge server serving area determination problem. Becauseupon the determined serving area of each MEC server, the
optimal location can be further decided trivially by ﬁnding the
centroid within the serving area.
By considering the underlying Radio Access Network
(RAN) in a certain region as a graph, the MEC servers plan-ning problem is formulated as a graph partitioning problem
such that node weights represent Base Stations (BSs) average
workloads and edge weights represent users handover man-agement costs in service data delivery. Hence, partitioning the
RAN graph with minimum edge cuts and balanced cluster
node weights refers to the optimum MEC servers planningwith minimum SSC management costs and balanced MEC
servers workloads. To solve this formulated problem, we adapt
a generalizable approximate Graph Partitioning frameworkproposed in [12] which leverages on Graph Neural Network
(GNN) to embed the RAN network spacial features and on
Multilayer Perceptron (MLP) for graph partitioning. We deﬁnethe loss function to generate partitions with balanced node
weight and minimum edge cut. Based on this generalizable
approximate partitioning (GAP) framework, we design anMEC server Planning algorithm, named as MECP-GAP, to
determine the optimum MEC servers planning from an input
RAN and users movements to minimize SSC management
costs with balanced MEC servers workloads. Moreover, the
framework is generalizable, once trained it can produce efﬁ-cient partitions results on unseen graphs at inference time.
Finally, we evaluate MECP-GAP with extensive simulations
and real network data. Comparing to two traditional algorithmsfor graph partitioning problem, MECP-GAP achieves better
performance with lower running time. Our contributions are
summarized as follows:•Firstly, we investigate the MEC servers planning problemto minimize the management cost for maintaining servicecontinuity for moving users. We formulate this problem
as a graph partitioning problem with minimum edge cuts
and balanced cluster node weights.
•Then, we adapt a learning-based framework to solve
the above problem. By integrating GNN and MLP, the
framework is generalizable for producing solutions forvarious types of unseen graphs at inference time. This is
an advantage over the traditional model-based methods
which must reperform the optimization problem for everynew use case.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Related works
are summarized in Section II. Then, Section IIIformulates
the problem of mobility-aware MEC planning through graph
partitioning. Then, we detail the MECP-GAP algorithm inSection IV. In Section V, we evaluate the performance gain of
MECP-GAP over several baselines. Finally, we conclude this
work in Section VI.
II. R
ELATED WORKS
A. Mobility Management
Mobile network planning optimization with respect to
mobility management is an important issue and has beenintensively studied in the literature. From the GSM system, a
group of cells is called Location Area (LA) to facilitate paging.
The planning of LAs aims to balance the tradeoff betweentwo conﬂicting metrics: the amount of paging messages and
registration signalling. In [13], the authors design the layout
of LAs to balance this tradeoff for the GSM system. From
the LTE system, Tracking Area (TA) is utilized to group cells
and to locate mobile devices. In [14], the authors determine
the TAs for the LTE network by applying multi-objective
optimization for achieving a balanced tradeoff between pag-
ing overhead and tracking area update, and they design anevolutionary multi-objective algorithm based on a population
decomposition strategy. In [15], the authors propose an TA list
management framework to format the optimal TA distributionin the form of TA lists and determine the association from
TA lists towards mobile devices for the 5G system. Besides,
data delivery is now the fundamental service types in mobilenetwork, and service continuity is essential important to ensure
that user sessions and services will survive user mobility.
In view of this, 5G enhances its mobility management byproviding three types of SSC modes to address various service
continuity requirements. In [16], the authors analyze mobility-
aware cellular network performance with several mobilitypatterns and network topologies. They also point out that
mobility would impact on service delivery and outline the
challenges for mobility-aware analysis. Hence, the 5G network
planning optimization should also consider to optimize the
structure and layout of the network for minimizing themanagement cost in maintaining service continuity. In this
work, we aim to study the MEC servers planning problem by
optimizing the management cost for maintaining MEC servicecontinuity.
In[17], the authors consider the issue of managing high-
speed mobility in 5G networks. To solve this problem,
Authorized licensed use limited to: POLO BIBLIOTECARIO DI INGEGNERIA. Downloaded on December 13,2024 at 14:57:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

--- PAGE 3 ---
LIU et al.: MOBILITY-AWARE MEC PLANNING WITH A GNN-BASED GRAPH PARTITIONING FRAMEWORK 4385
the authors propose an online learn-based mechanism that
uses Kalman ﬁlters to compute the posterior value ofthe RSRP values of service units and adjacent units to
determine the best target unit for switching, so as to
maintain high performance under extremely high mobilityafter migration. Simulations show that this mechanism can
signiﬁcantly improve handover execution in 5G, enabling
intelligent handling of high-speed mobile management in 5Gand beyond. In [18], a novel two-layer cooperative satellite
network architecture is proposed. Based on the proposed two-
layer cooperative satellite network architecture, four mobilitymanagement scenarios in satellite-ground communication sce-
narios are studied. For each scenario, the corresponding
switching mode is proposed to ensure the continuity of
terminal services, and the corresponding signaling overhead is
analyzed. Simulation results show that the proposed switchingmode can greatly reduce the signaling overhead. In [19],t h e
authors examine the challenges facing emerging and future
cellular Networks such as Ultra-Dense Multi-Band Networks(UDMNs), including Resource-Inefﬁciency and Scarcity, User-
Experience Degradation and Unprecedented Channel Behavior
in mmWave Cells. The author proposes an Advanced MobilityManagement and Utilization based on machine-learning-based
mobility and trafﬁc prediction models Framework. The frame-
work is capable of predicting mobility patterns, next candidatecells for handover, and handover time, as well as future cell
loads.
B. MEC Planning
Determining an optimum planning of MEC edge servers
is a fundamental precondition for deploying an MEC system,
which has attracted wide attention in recent years. Mostexisting works are traditional model-based methods which
formulate the MEC planning problem as an optimization
problem. Due to the complexity of the problem, heuristicalgorithms are normally proposed. In [7], the authors jointly
optimize the placement of MEC servers and UPF through
ILP in a dynamic network environment. In [8], the authors
jointly consider edge server deployment and service placement
to maximize the overall proﬁt of the MEC system. They
propose a two-step method including a clustering algorithmand nonlinear programming to solve the formulated problem.
In[6], the authors formulate the MEC edge servers placement
problem with dynamic uncertain resource demands throughan uncertain programming formulation, and a learning based
algorithm is proposed to practically solve the problem. In
their algorithm, meta-heuristic is utilized to explore the solu-tion space, with MLP utilized to perform a fast prediction
for the ﬁtness function. In [9], the authors formulate the
edge server placement problem as a capacitated location
allocation problem and provide an heuristic algorithm for
effective solutions. In [10], the authors study the MEC server
placement in smart cities. They formulate the problem as
a multi-objective constraint optimization problem and adopt
mixed integer programming to ﬁnd the optimal solution. Formobility-aware MEC network resource allocation, in [20],
the authors study the edge server user association problemin dynamic environment where edge user high mobility is
considered. The problem is formulated as an online decision-making and evolvable process for allocating users at real-time.
In[21], the authors propose a mobility-aware task ofﬂoading
scheme for vehicular MEC network, and they develop a DeepReinforcement Learning (DRL)-based algorithm to train the
ofﬂoading strategy.
C. Graph Partitioning Problem
We formulate the MEC planning problem as a graph
partitioning problem, where BS nodes are partitioned into
clusters and each cluster is served by one MEC server. The
graph partitioning problem has been extensively studied in
the literature. Hence, we also survey related works in this
topic. Graph partitioning is the problem of dividing the nodesof a graph into balanced partitions while minimizing the
edge cut across the partitions. Graph partitioning is a well
studied optimization problem and has a wide application invarious domains. Traditional well-known algorithms include
the Breadth First Search (BFS) algorithm, the Kernighan-Lin
(KL) algorithm, the spectral method based on eigen-vectordecomposition of the graph Laplacian matrix. From the above
methods, the METIS algorithm [22] works very well in prac-
tice and is largely adopted. Moreover, with the developmentof the AI technology, there are also works that investi-
gate solving the graph partitioning problem through machine
learning-based methods. In [23], by combining the simulated-
annealing algorithm and the Hopﬁeld neural network, the
authors ﬁrst propose an learning based algorithm for solving
the graph partitioning problem. In [12], the authors propose
a Generalizable Approximate Partitioning framework, named
as the GAP framework. The framework contains two parts: agraph embedding part that leverages on Graph Neural Network
(GNN) to embed the graph spacial feature; and a graph parti-
tioning part that leverages on Multilayer Perceptron (MLP) forgraph partitioning. In [24], a theoretical performance analysis
of the GNN is presented. A mean-ﬁeld theory of a minimal
GNN architecture is developed for the graph partitioningproblem. Numerical experiment results shows GNN’s accuracy
in performing classiﬁcation tasks.
D. Graph Neural Network
Graph neural networks (GNNs) are a set of deep learning
methods that treat graph structured data in non-Euclidean
space. GNN has been intensively studied and applied inmultiple domains including: combinatorial optimization [12],
computer vision [25], and network management [26].T h e
idea of GNN was ﬁrst introduced in [27], the authors extend
existing neural network methods for processing data repre-
sented in graphical form. The general idea of GNN is to learn
a state embedding by exploring topological structure of thegraph and aggregating information from the neighbors of each
node. This embedding is then further utilized for downstream
tasks, such as graph-level, node-level or edge level tasks.There are several types of GNNs. The Graph Convolutional
Networks (GCNs) [28] utilize the convolution operation as
Authorized licensed use limited to: POLO BIBLIOTECARIO DI INGEGNERIA. Downloaded on December 13,2024 at 14:57:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

--- PAGE 4 ---
4386 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 4, AUGUST 2024
Fig. 1. 5G MEC data network and MEC planning.
deﬁned in the Fourier domain by computing the eigen decom-
position of the graph Laplacian. The Message Passing NeuralNetworks (MPNNs) consists of message, update, and readout
functions which operate on nodes and edges in the graph [29].
The Graph Attention Networks (GAT) applies the attentionmechanism to aggregate information from node neighbors
through a weighted sum [30]. The GAP framework [12] is
designed to solve graph partitioning problem by using graphembedding and optimizing the partitioning loss function. In
this work, we leverage on GAP to solve the mobility-aware
MEC planning problem, which is formulated as a graphpartitioning problem. We design the input and the loss function
to adjust the algorithm into our case. Simulation results shows
that our improved framework and algorithm achieves betterplanning result with lower running time by comparing to
several traditional baselines.
III. S
YSTEM MODEL
In this section, we formulate the mobility-aware MEC
edge servers planning problem, which takes into account the
management cost for SSC continuity. The handover cost ofusers is formulated based on 3GPP technical speciﬁcations.
Finally, the problem is formulated as a graph-partitioning
problem with minimum edge cut and balanced node weight.
A. Problem Description
An overview of the 5G MEC data network and the cor-
responding MEC planning is shown in Fig. 1. Three MEC
servers are deployed to serve mobile users from multiple
gNBs. Each MEC server is equipped with resources to serveusers from several certain gNBs, and these gNBs are the
serving area of the MEC server. By applying the Uplink
Classiﬁer (UL CL) technology and conﬁguring UPFs, trafﬁc
from these gNBs can be directed to their serving MEC servers.
In the case of PDU Sessions of type IPv4 or IPv6 or IPv4v6or Ethernet, the SMF may decide to insert in the data path
of a PDU Session an “UL CL” (Uplink classiﬁer). The UL
CL is a functionality supported by an UPF that aims atdiverting (locally) some trafﬁc matching trafﬁc ﬁlters provided
by the SMF [2]. The insertion and removal of an UL CL isFig. 2. SSC mode 1 handover procedure between gNBs.
decided by the SMF and controlled by the SMF using generic
N4 and UPF capabilities. The UL CL can be conﬁguredwith the trafﬁc rules to forward the uplink trafﬁc towards
different targeted applications and network functions, and in
the downlink direction it will merge the trafﬁc destined to theUEs [31].
Mobile users are free to move, consequently, handovers
can happen in different levels: gNBs level and MEC serverslevel. For a moving user, when she crosses the boundaries
of gNBs, the user’s PDU session, which starts from the user
and ends in the MEC server, should take a handover fromgNB1 to gNB2, incurring signaling costs. The handover delay
also leads to deteriorated user Quality of Experience (QoE).
Furthermore, if the user moves in a large geographical scale
which extends beyond the boundaries of MEC server serving
area, this would results in higher handover signaling costand increased transmission delay. Therefore, the objective of
mobility-aware MEC planning is to determine the serving
areas of each MEC server to minimize the handover costs formobile users.
B. Mobility Management Cost
Then, we quantify the handover management costs in
multiple different levels. In this paper, two types of handover
procedures are considered: the ﬁrst one is between gNBs
but within the same MEC serving area, and the second isbetween MEC servers. The ﬁrst one is also referred as SSC
mode 1. SSC mode 1 is deﬁned in detail in the 3GPP
technical speciﬁcation TS 23.502 [32], which comprehensively
deﬁnes various procedures within the 5G system. Following
the speciﬁcation, we provide a summary of the SSC mode
1 handover procedure between gNBs, as shown in Fig. 2,w i t h
detailed procedures outlined in Chapter 4.9.1.2 of TS 23.502.
This handover process comprises handover preparation,
handover execution, PDU Session modiﬁcation, channel cre-
ation and registration procedure. Following these procedures,
the UE PDU Session service undergoes a handover fromthe source-gNB (noted as Source NG-RAN in the ﬁgure) to the
target-gNB (Target NG-RAN), controlled by 5G core network
functions including AMF, SMF, and UPF. Consequently, wecalculate the cost c
gfor handovers between gNBs within the
same MEC serving area in SSC mode 1 as follows:
Authorized licensed use limited to: POLO BIBLIOTECARIO DI INGEGNERIA. Downloaded on December 13,2024 at 14:57:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

--- PAGE 5 ---
LIU et al.: MOBILITY-AWARE MEC PLANNING WITH A GNN-BASED GRAPH PARTITIONING FRAMEWORK 4387
Fig. 3. SSC mode 3 handover procedure between MEC servers.
cg=THP+THE+TPMCC +TRP
=2TN2+TN3+2TN4+2TN11
+5TXn+3TUE−RAN
+Thandover _decision +Tadmission _control,
where TN2,TN3,TN4, and TN11represent the time delays
between core network functions in the corresponding interface,
whilst TXnandTUE−RAN denote the time delays between
access network interfaces. Specially, Thandover _decision and
Tadmission _control stand for the time consumed by network
functions in decision-making processes. Considering that the
time consumption for these functions is signiﬁcantly lower
than the others, we neglect them in the following part.
Then, we also provide an overview of the handover proce-
dure between MEC servers in Fig. 3. The handover between
MEC servers corresponds to SSC mode 2 and mode 3, asdeﬁned in Chapter 4.3.5.2 of TS 23.502. For improved user
QoE, in this work, we consider that the handover follows
SSC mode 3 due to its lower service interruption delay. Then,as depicted in Fig. 3, this procedure comprises three primary
steps. Initially, SMF1 determines UPF relocation based on the
UE’s mobility. Then, SMF2 establishes a new PDU sessionfrom MEC server2 to the UE. Finally, SMF1 releases the
old PDU session from MEC server1 to the UE. Let c
M
denotes the handover cost between MEC servers, which can
be calculated as:
cM=Tdetermine +TPRP +TPEP
=3TN1+2TN2+TN3+1 3 TN4+4TN6+6TN7
+4TN10+1 0 TN11+3TUE−RAN +TSMF _Selection
+TPCF _Selection +2TUPF _Selection +TTrigger.
where TN1,TN2,TN3,TN4,TN6,TN7,TN10, and
TN11represent the time delay between the correspond-
ing core network functions through these interfaces, and
TUE−RAN denotes the time delay from access network
interfaces. Additionally, TSMF _Selection ,TPCF _Selection ,
TUPF _Selection , and TTrigger denote the time consumed by
network function decision-making processes. These decision-
making processes are described in detail in clause 4.3.2.2.1 of
TS 23.502. Each decision-making process in cMis a complex
process to make decisions according to the actual situation, so
the decision delay of cMis much larger than cg’s.C. Graph-Partitioning Problem Formulation
Let G=(V,E) represents a 5G RAN network graph,
where the set V={vi}corresponds to the 5G gNBs, and the
setE={e(vi,vj)|vi∈V,vj∈V}represents the handover
behaviors between gNBs. Then, the weight of e(vi,vj)is
denoted as wij, which quantiﬁes the average number of users
moving from gNB vito gNB vj. Moreover, we consider
the graph Gas an undirected graph, because the handover
behavior is symmetric between two gNBs. We assume thatthere are NgNBs in total, and all gNBs are served by several
MEC Server. The total number of MEC Servers is denoted
asP. Consequently, the entire RAN network should be divided
intoPpartitions, deﬁned as S
1,S2,..., SP. Hence, the union
of all partitions is equal to V:∪P
k=1Sk=V, and each gNB
exclusively belongs to one partition: Sk∩S/prime
k=∅∀k,k/prime.
The number of gNBs in partition SkisNk, satisfying/summationtextP
K=1Nk=N.
As deﬁned in Section III-B , the handover cost between
gNBs within the same MEC serving area is denoted as cg,
whilst the handover cost between gNBs from different MECserving area is denoted as c
M. Based on the descriptions
provided for each interface in 3GPP TS23.501, it is obvious
thatcM>cg.
We introduce the decision variable xikto show the depen-
dency relationship between gNB viand partition Sk, where
xik=1 means that gNB vibelongs to partition Sk, and
xik=0 indicates the opposite. Our objective is to minimize
user handover costs by optimizing the distribution of MEC
servers under load balancing conditions. Therefore, the objec-tive function is expressed as follows
minα·Edge _cut+β·Load _balancing , (1)
where
Load _balancing =P/summationdisplay
k=1/parenleftbigg
Nk−N
P/parenrightbigg2
=P/summationdisplay
k=1/parenleftBiggN/summationdisplay
i=1xik−N
P/parenrightBigg2
, (2)
Edge _cut=cM·P/summationdisplay
k=1/summationdisplay
vi∈Sk,vj∈Ske/parenleftbig
vi,vj/parenrightbig
·wij
+cg·P/summationdisplay
k=1/summationdisplay
vi,vj∈Ske/parenleftbig
vi,vj/parenrightbig
·wij
=cM·lM+cg·lg
=cM·lM+cg·(lsum−lM)
=/parenleftbig
cM−cg/parenrightbig
·lM+cg·lsum, (3)
α,βare positive normalized parameters. In Eq. (3),w es e t
lM=/summationdisplay
vi∈Sk,vj∈Ske/parenleftbig
vi,vj/parenrightbig
·wij,
lg=/summationdisplay
vi,vj∈Ske/parenleftbig
vi,vj/parenrightbig
·wij,
lsum =lM+lg,
Authorized licensed use limited to: POLO BIBLIOTECARIO DI INGEGNERIA. Downloaded on December 13,2024 at 14:57:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

--- PAGE 6 ---
4388 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 4, AUGUST 2024
Fig. 4. The I-GAP framework.
where Skis the complement of SkinV. The constraints of
the problem are as follows:
P/summationdisplay
k=1xik=1∀vi∈V, (4)
P/summationdisplay
k=1N/summationdisplay
i=1xik=N. (5)
From Eq. (1)to(3), our optimization objective is to
minimize the sum of user mobility handover cost and network
load balancing, with αandβare used for balancing the
optimization direction. Eq. (2)represents the variance of the
number of gNBs within different partitions. For the layout
and planning of gNBs, they are deployed to serve users byconsidering the geographical population density. Hence, the
number of gNBs represents the workloads for MEC servers.
In Eq. (3), we split the user handover cost into two parts:
one is the handover cost resulting from movement between
different partitions, and the other is the handover cost resultingfrom movement between gNBs within the same partition.
Furthermore, Constraint (4)ensures that a gNB can only
belong to one partition, and Constraint (5)implies that each
gNB should be assigned to one partition.
In Eq. (3), when c
M>cgis ensured, the partition results
S1,S2,..., SPremain unaffected by the speciﬁc values of cM
and cg. Therefore, we set cM=1,cg=0, and simplify
Eq.(3)into the following form. In this case, Edge _cut is
deﬁned to minimize the weights of edges between differentpartitions.
Edge _cut=l
M=P/summationdisplay
k=1/summationdisplay
vi∈Sk,vj∈Ske/parenleftbig
vi,vj/parenrightbig
·wij,(6)
Based on Eq. (2)and (6), the problem of mobility-aware
MEC server planning is formulated into a graph partitioning
problem. The objective is to determine an optimum balancedpartitions of the 5G RAN network to minimize the sum
weights of edge cuts between partitions.IV . A
LGORITHM
In this section, we adapt the GAP framework [12] and
design the MECP-GAP algorithm for mobility-aware MEC
planning. Firstly, we introduce the graph learning-based GAPframework to tackle the Graph Partitioning problem. Then,
the structure of our improved GAP framework is outlined,
and the design of the loss function is described in detail.Subsequently, we develop the MECP-GAP algorithm based
on deep learning to solve the MEC server planning problem.
Finally, the algorithm’s complexity is analyzed.
A. Problem Deﬁnition
In Section III, we formulate the mobility-aware MEC server
planning problem as a Graph Partitioning problem. Many tra-ditional algorithms have been proposed for solving the Graph
Partitioning problem [33]. For instance, the Metis algorithm is
a powerful graph partitioning software package known for its
efﬁciency [22]. Recently, deep learning is also applied in solv-
ing optimization problems. The Graph Partitioning problemis also investigated to be solved through learning methods.
The GAP framework, proposed in [12], utilizes the GNN for
embedding graph nodes features and MLP for partitioningnodes. Comparing to traditional algorithms, the Learning-
based GAP algorithm has made signiﬁcant improvements in
optimization objectives and algorithm runtime. We improvedthis framework (noted as I-GAP framework) to adapt it to
solve the above MEC servers planning problem. The I-GAP
partitioning framework is illustrated in Fig. 4.
1) Loss Function: Before introducing the I-GAP frame-
work model, we ﬁrst present the model’s loss function. Ourobjective is to obtain the partition result X
n×pbased on gNB
features Fn×fand adjacency weights Wn×n. The partition
result is represented as a n×pmatrix Xn×p. In this matrix,
the element xik=1indicates that gNB vibelongs to partition
Sk, while xik=0 represents the opposite. Thus, we can
reformulate Eq. (6)as follows
E[edge _cut]=/summationdisplay
reduce−sumX·(1−X)T⊙W, (7)
Authorized licensed use limited to: POLO BIBLIOTECARIO DI INGEGNERIA. Downloaded on December 13,2024 at 14:57:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

--- PAGE 7 ---
LIU et al.: MOBILITY-AWARE MEC PLANNING WITH A GNN-BASED GRAPH PARTITIONING FRAMEWORK 4389
where⊙represents the element-wise product./summationtext
reduce−sum
refers to the operation of summing the elements in an matrix,
adding all elements together to obtain a single cumulative
total. This is a common data processing and computational
operation. The matrix Wn×nis the adjacency weight matrix,
where each element wijcorresponds to the number of users
moving from gNB vito gNB vj. Similarly, we can express
Eq.(2)in matrix form as follows
E[load_balancing ]=/summationdisplay
reduce−sum/parenleftbigg
1TX−N
P/parenrightbigg2
.(8)
Combining Eq. (7)and Eq. (8), the loss function of I-GAP
model can be expressed as follows
L=α·/summationdisplay
reduce−sumX·(1−X)T⊙W
+β·/summationdisplay
reduce−sum/parenleftbigg
1TX−N
P/parenrightbigg2
, (9)
whereαandβare used for normalization. They are conﬁgured
to ensure that the values of edge cut and load balancing arewithin the same range.
2) I-GAP Framework: The I-GAP model comprises two
main modules: the graph embedding module and the graph
partitioning module. The former focuses on learning nodeembeddings using both graph structure and node features. In
I-GAP, the graphSAGE [34] model is employed to embed
node representations, which emphasizes sampling and aggre-gation. As an inductive learning method, graphSAGE not only
learns the embedding representations of each node in the
graph, but also learns the aggregation function used to sample
and aggregate neighbor nodes to generate new embedding rep-
resentations of node [34]. Unlike other transductive methods
which only perform representations learning on a ﬁxed graph,
graphSAGE has good inductive ability and does not need to
know the information of all nodes when implementing graphembedding, which is suitable for large-scale graphs and unseen
graphs [35].
In our I-GAP framework, we replace the adjacency matrix
with the adjacency weight matrix to improve the sampling
process of graphSAGE. Each node sample among its neighbors
to aggregate their representations. This process is shown inEq.(10):
h
k
N(v)←AGGREGAT E k/parenleftBig
{hk−1
u,∀u∈N(v)}/parenrightBig
,(10)
where hk
N(v)represents the embedded representation of node
vat the current step k.hk−1u represents the embedded rep-
resentation of node uat step k−1, and N(v) represents
all neighbors of node v. In the original graphSAGE model,
neighbor sampling follows the uniform distribution. This
means nodes take ﬁxed samples from their neighbors in a
completely random manner. The process is shown in Eq. (11):
u←UNIFORM (N(v)). (11)
The improvement of graphSAGE lies in the improvement
of the random sampling process. Speciﬁcally, suppose node v
and node uare adjacent, and the edge weight between themiswvu. Then the probability that node uis sampled as the
neighbor of node vis:
P(u|v)=wvu/summationtext
i∈N(v)wvi, (12)
where/summationtext
i∈N(v)wvirepresents the sum of adjacent edge
weights from node vto all its neighbors. Then in our
graphSAGE model, the sampling process can be described as:
u←uw i t hp r o b a b i l i t yP (u|v). (13)
As can be seen from Eq. (13), the larger the edge weight
between two nodes, the easier it is sampled and aggregated
together. After graph aggregation, their feature vectors aremore similar, so they are more easily to be divided into the
same partition after graph partitioning module, which is also
consistent with the problem to be solved in this paper.
The graph partitioning module consists of a fully connected
network followed by softmax and is trained to minimize the
loss function Eq. (9). Because the graph partitioning module
actually completes a classiﬁcation task. That is, according to
the node embedding representation generated by the graph
embedding module, the gNBs is classiﬁed into differentpartitions. As a ﬂexible model architecture, fully connected
network can be applied to various classiﬁcation problems and
has wide applicability in various scenarios [36].
B. MECP-GAP Algorithm
In this section, the MECP-GAP algorithm is proposed. The
primary steps of this algorithm are outlined in Algorithm 1.
It is emphasized that Algorithm 1operates in parallel
with network training, concurrently producing the networkmodel and partition results. Consequently, the primary factor
inﬂuencing the time complexity is the number of training
epoch, denoted as e
1.L e t Nrepresent the number of gNBs. In
the sampling process, as we set a ﬁxed number of sampling,
the time complexity of the sampling process is O(1). In the
aggregation process, the mean representation of the neighbornodes needs to be calculated. Assuming that there are nﬁxed
samples in the neighbors and the data feature dimension is
m, the upper limit of the time complexity of the aggregation
process is O(n∗m). As matrix operations are used in the
actual calculation, the actual complexity will be less than this
value.
In the classiﬁcation process, the classiﬁcation network needs
to be trained. Speciﬁcally, the training epoch is set as e
2,b
represents the number of batches, and the time complexity of
calculating the loss function is related to batch size, denoted
asO(s). We ignore the time which takes to update the
network parameters. So, the time complexity of Algorithm 1
isO(e1(N(1 + n∗m)+e2∗b∗s)), simpliﬁes to O(e1N+
e1Nnm +e1e2bs).
C. Practical Relevance
The proposed MECP-GAP algorithm solves the problem
of MEC server deployment for mobility management. Sincethe MEC server needs sufﬁcient hardware support, the MEC
server in our scenario will not move once deployed, which is
Authorized licensed use limited to: POLO BIBLIOTECARIO DI INGEGNERIA. Downloaded on December 13,2024 at 14:57:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

--- PAGE 8 ---
4390 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 4, AUGUST 2024
Algorithm 1 MECP-GAP Algorithm
Input: learning rate η; normalization parameters α,β; epoch
number Nepoch ; feature matrix Fn×f; adjacency weight matrix
Wn×n.
Output: partition probabilities matrix Xn×p.
1:Initialize the fully network parameters and Xn×p;
2:Divide the nodes into train nodes vtrain and test nodes
vtest;
3:forepoch 1=1,...,e1do
4: Divide vtrain into batches.
5: forviinvtrain do
6: fi←sample neighbors according to Eq. (13) and
aggregate fNeigh (i);
7: Normalize fi;
8: end for
9: forepoch 2=1,...,e2do
10: forbatch in range(batches) do
11: X=classiﬁcation (Fbatch );
12: L=calculate (X)with Wusing vbatch ;
13: Update classiﬁcation network parameters using
gradient descent based on L;
14: end for
15: end for
16: Evaluate the network using vtest and update graph-
SAGE network parameters;
17:end for
18:return Xn×p, I-GAP network model.
also consistent with the reality. First, regarding the adaptability
of the algorithm, based on the generalization ability of
the I-GAP graph neural network framework, the network
parameters obtained by training on a large graph can bedirectly used to partition the new graph (network) to deploy
the MEC server. Therefore, MECP-GAP algorithm has good
adaptability. MECP-GAP can even deal with unseen graphs,so it also has good robustness. Regarding the scalability
of the algorithm, the MEC algorithm is suitable for small-
scale networks (hundreds of gNBs) and large-scale networks(thousands of gNBs). When facing the challenge of hyper-scale
network (millions of gNBs), network operators can manually
split the network into many general scale networks. Thenthe MECP-GAP algorithm is applied to the general scale
networks.
V. S
IMULATION
We conduct intensive simulations to evaluate our proposed
MECP-GAP algorithm. Two sets of simulations are conducted,
the ﬁrst is a small scale network simulation to illustrate the
partitioning results more clearly. The second is a large scale
network simulation with real gNBs dataset. Comparing to twowidely used traditional graph partitioning algorithms, MECP-
GAP achieves better partitioning results with lower running
time.
A. Simulation Setting
In the small scale simulation, there are 200 gNBs, and their
geographical locations are generated using a Poisson PointProcess. For the large scale simulation, we utilize the location
coordinates of 2170 gNBs located in Shanghai, China, fromthe ofﬁcial website of Opencellid [37]. Opencellid is an open-
source platform that provides location coordinates for gNBs
and eNBs across the globe.
The adjacency weight matrix, denoted as W, incorpo-
rates information about both the adjacency relationship and
the number of handovers between gNBs. In our simula-tion, we utilize the human movement model proposed by
Liang et al. [38] to generate the values in W. This model is
capable of estimating the volume of population movementsbetween two regions based on the distance separating those
regions and the sizes of the regions. It is a well-established
human movement model commonly used in sociology, which
enhances the realism of our simulation results. To generate W
in our simulation, we ﬁrst create a V oronoi graph based onthe geographical locations of the gNBs. The V oronoi graph
delineates the service areas for each gNB. Subsequently, we
input the gNB location information and the associated areainformation into the human movement model to calculate the
number of handover users moving between gNBs and obtain
the adjacency weight matrix W.
The I-GAP model comprises two primary modules: the
graph embedding module and the graph partitioning module.
In the graph embedding module, we employ the graphSAGEmodel, which is a 2-layer graph convolutional network. It takes
input features with a dimensionality of 200 and outputs embed-
dings of dimensionality 128. The gNB’s geographical locationis utilized as its feature for both small scale and large scale
simulations. To aggregate neighboring node representations in
graphSAGE, we employ the mean aggregator. Compared with
LSTM aggregator and pooling aggregator, the mean aggregator
are more suitable for scenarios where the overall informationof neighbor nodes is retained. This method is often used in
tasks such as node classiﬁcation and graph partitioning. In
the graph partitioning module, we utilize a fully connectedneural network to transform the 128-dimensional input matrix
into the desired number of partitions. The partition result Xis
obtained using the softmax activation.
B. Baseline Algorithms
The greedy algorithm: in the work of Taleb and
Ksentini [33], they introduced a pseudo-greedy algorithm
to address the graph partitioning problem. This algorithminitiates by randomly selecting a node v
ifrom the node
set to serve as the center of partition Sk. It then iterates
through all neighbors of vi, evaluating whether each neighbor
satisﬁes certain constraint conditions. If a neighbor meets these
conditions, it is added to partition Sk. This process continues
until no more nodes can be added to the partition. This
algorithm is a classical approach for graph partitioning, and
its performance typically improves with an increased numberof iterations.
The Metis algorithm [22]: is a widely used graph par-
titioning algorithm known for its high efﬁciency. It servesas a common baseline for graph partitioning algorithms.
This algorithm requires input data regarding node and link
information, as well as the desired number of partitions. It is
Authorized licensed use limited to: POLO BIBLIOTECARIO DI INGEGNERIA. Downloaded on December 13,2024 at 14:57:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

--- PAGE 9 ---
LIU et al.: MOBILITY-AWARE MEC PLANNING WITH A GNN-BASED GRAPH PARTITIONING FRAMEWORK 4391
capable of swiftly producing partition results, which makes it
a suitable choice for our baseline comparison.
PBPA: in [39], the author focuses on the operation and
dynamic deployment of MEC servers. Based on PPO rein-
forcement learning framework, PBPA algorithm is designedto determine the placement and migration of MEC servers in
dynamic scenarios to minimize operating costs, which is a very
advanced method in MEC server deployment related works.
C. Small Scale Network Simulation
In this section, a small-scale simulation involving 200 gNBs
is conducted, and the speciﬁc partition results are shown in
Fig. 5.
Fig. 5(a-e) shows the outcomes of the small scale sim-
ulation, ranging from two partitions to six partitions. Thepartitions are signiﬁed by different colored nodes, with blue
lines denoting the boundaries of gNB’s serving area created
by the V oronoi graph. The black lines represent the numberof handovers, with thicker lines indicating higher handover
numbers.
In Fig. 5(a), the RAN network is partitioned into two parts
with two colors. It is obvious that the two partitions are
fairly balanced. In the case of more partitions, MECP-GAP
ensures a balanced trade-off between edge cut optimizationand load balancing. In Fig. 5(b), green nodes are added as
a new partition. This outcome stems from MECP-GAP’s
inclination towards improving the edge cut in this particularaccess network topology. Fig. 5(c-e) show the partition results
for scenarios involving four to six partitions. The network
operators can judiciously choose the number of partitions for
MEC server deployment, taking into consideration the local
user load and server capacity.
Fig. 6illustrates the convergence behavior of MECP-GAP,
using the six partitions scenario as an example. It becomes
notably stable when the epoch≈50.F i g . 7presents a com-
parison of the average running times for the three algorithms.
Since PBPA deploying MEC servers only be used on a
ﬁxed graph. So the algorithm execution and network trainingprocess of PBPA are carried out simultaneously. Its simulation
time is about 242.32s~265.45s. As the time is much longer
than the above three algorithms’, we did not put it on Fig. 7.
It should be noted that we rely on the runtime performance
of MECP-GAP derived from the trained I-GAP network
model. This approach leverages the inherent generalizationcapabilities of the I-GAP network model. Notably, the MECP-
GAP algorithm consistently maintains a low running time. In
contrast, both the Greedy algorithm and Metis take longer toexecute than MECP-GAP. The running time of the Greedy
algorithm appears to change with the number of partitions,
suggesting that the algorithm’s performance may be inﬂuenced
by the partition number. Metis, on the other hand, runs the
longest, approximately three times as long as MECP-GAP.
Fig. 8(a-c) illustrate the loss function, edge cut, and
load balancing plots with different number of partitions. In
Fig. 8(a), all the four curves increase as the number of
partitions increases. It’s worth noting that, for the purpose of
demonstrating algorithm performance, we set α=1/1000 and
Fig. 5. Small scale network partition result from two partitions to six
partitions.
β=1. So the result values of edge cut and load balancing
are in the same order of magnitude. Consequently, the trend
of the curve in Fig. 8(a) is similar to that in Fig. 8(b).
Authorized licensed use limited to: POLO BIBLIOTECARIO DI INGEGNERIA. Downloaded on December 13,2024 at 14:57:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

--- PAGE 10 ---
4392 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 4, AUGUST 2024
Fig. 6. Convergence of MECP-GAP for small scale network.
Fig. 7. Running time of MECP-GAP for small scale network.
The loss function of MECP-GAP is optimized under each
partition because both of its components are optimal, as
conﬁrmed by Fig. 8(b) and Fig. 8(c). Fig. 8(b) shows the
edge cut values, which increase with the growing number of
partitions. Meanwhile, Fig. 8(c) displays the load balancing
results of the three algorithms as they change with the number
of partitions. Notably, the load balancing for the Greedy
algorithm, Metis and PBPA exhibits no ﬁxed trend due to theinherent randomness of these two algorithms. However, for
MECP-GAP, the load balancing generally increases from 2 to
53 with the growing number of partitions.
Fig. 9shows how the average handover delay of users
changes over time in the small-scale network. The six par-
titions results generated by four algorithms are deployed tosmall-scale networks. By setting the mobile user to move
linearly between different gNB areas, the simulation time is set
to 80 minutes. The ﬁrst ten minutes are the warm-up time. Asthe mobile users are deployed to the network, it begins to move
in the network and across the boundaries of the MEC coverage
area. Then the handover delay of the user to handover betweenthe MEC server coverage areas under different algorithm is
observed. It can be seen that MECP-GAP algorithm is the
smallest in most of the time. It means that in the MEC service
network generated by MECP-GAP, the average handover delay
of users is the lowest. Besides, its ﬂuctuation is also the moststable, which shows that the load balancing part of the loss
function works, so that the handover tasks of users are more
balanced. In contrast, Metis and Greedy perform less well. Theaverage handover delay of PBPA is the highest and ﬂuctuates
in a wide range.Fig. 8. Small scale optimization objective: (a) loss function, (b) edge cut,
(c) load balancing.
D. Large Scale Network Simulation
In this section, we present the results of the large scale
simulation. Due to the high density of gNBs in the simulation,the speciﬁc partition result graph would not be displayed.
Fig. 10illustrates the convergence of the MECP-GAP
algorithm in the large scale simulation. It’s evident that the
algorithm approaches convergence when epoch<50.F i g . 11
displays the average running time of the three algorithms inthe large scale simulation. Metis exhibits a slightly shorter
average running time than MECP-GAP, indicating that Metis
has a time advantage when dealing with large scale networks.The running time of Metis ﬂuctuates between 1032 ms and
1104 ms, while MECP-GAP ﬂuctuates between 1427 ms and
Authorized licensed use limited to: POLO BIBLIOTECARIO DI INGEGNERIA. Downloaded on December 13,2024 at 14:57:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

--- PAGE 11 ---
LIU et al.: MOBILITY-AWARE MEC PLANNING WITH A GNN-BASED GRAPH PARTITIONING FRAMEWORK 4393
Fig. 9. Average handover delay for small scale network.
Fig. 10. Convergence of MECP-GAP for large scale network.
Fig. 11. Running time of MECP-GAP for large scale network.
1540 ms. Specially, the Greedy algorithm runs signiﬁcantly
slower than the ﬁrst two when handling large scale networks,
taking approximately ten times longer than the others. Thisis due to the high time complexity of greedy algorithms in
the worst-case scenario. Similarly, PBPA only be used on a
ﬁxed graph when deploying MEC servers. The execution timeof PBPA is in range of 1598.68s~1683.41s, which is much
longer than the previous three algorithms. So it is not marked
in Fig. 11.
Fig. 12(a-c) illustrates the changes in the loss function
and its components for the four algorithms in the large-scalesimulation. In Fig. 12(a), it’s evident that MECP-GAP’s loss
function remains optimal, roughly
1
3∼1
2of Metis. Fig. 12(b)
speciﬁcally examines the edge cut component. The value forMECP-GAP is slightly lower than Metis’s, both of which are
lower than the Greedy algorithm and PBPA. In Fig. 12(c),Fig. 12. Large scale optimization objective: (a) loss function, (b) edge cut,
(c) load balancing.
it becomes apparent that the load balancing achieved by
MECP-GAP is better in each partition compared to the other
algorithms. This indicates that the partitions created by MECP-
GAP are more balanced, making the server less prone tooverload issues.
Fig. 13shows how the average handover delay of the four
algorithms changes over time in a large-scale network. It is
generated in the same way as the small-scale simulation. It is
obvious that MECP-GAP has the best performance in termsof delay value and stability. In contrast, Metis and Greedy
delay values are longer and ﬂuctuate in a large range. PBPA
ﬂuctuates in a large range, and its delay value is the longestin four algorithms. Mobile users have the worst handover
experience in this scenario.
Authorized licensed use limited to: POLO BIBLIOTECARIO DI INGEGNERIA. Downloaded on December 13,2024 at 14:57:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

--- PAGE 12 ---
4394 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 4, AUGUST 2024
Fig. 13. Average handover delay for large scale network.
VI. C ONCLUSION
In this work, we investigate the optimum mobility-aware
MEC server planning problem by determining the serving area
of each MEC servers to minimize the handover management
cost for maintaining service continuity and balancing MEC
servers workloads at the same time. The problem is formulated
as a graph partitioning problem to partition the 5G RANgraph with minimum SSC management costs and balanced
MEC servers workloads. Then, we adapt the GAP framework
and propose a MEC server planning algorithm MECP-GAP.Leveraging on deep learning, MECP-GAP achieves better
performance with lower running time by comparing to sev-
eral traditional baselines. For future work, network planningoptimization should be emphasized on more network scenar-
ios, such as the 6G network. And learning based methods can
be applied in dealing with more typical problems.
R
EFERENCES
[1] S. Ji, M. Sheng, D. Zhou, W. Bai, Q. Cao, and J. Li, “Flexible
and distributed mobility management for integrated terrestrial-satellite
networks: Challenges, architectures, and approaches,” IEEE Netw. ,
vol. 35, no. 4, pp. 73–81, Jul./Aug. 2021.
[2] “System architecture for the 5G system; stage 2; Release 15,” 3GPP,
Sophia Antipolis, France, Rep. TS 23.501, 2017.
[3] J. Liu, Q. Yang, and G. Simon, “Congestion avoidance and load
balancing in content placement and request redirection for mobile CDN,”
IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw. , vol. 26, no. 2, pp. 851–863, Apr. 2018.
[4] T. Taleb, S. Dutta, A. Ksentini, M. Iqbal, and H. Flinck, “Mobile edge
computing potential in making cities smarter,” IEEE Commun. Mag. ,
vol. 55, no. 3, pp. 38–43, Mar. 2017.
[5] J. Qin and J. Liu, “Multi-access edge ofﬂoading based on physical layer
security in C-V2X system,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol. , vol. 71, no. 7,
pp. 6912–6923, Jul. 2022.
[6] M. Shao, J. Liu, Q. Yang, and G. Simon, “A learning based framework
for MEC server planning with uncertain BSs demands,” IEEE Access ,
vol. 8, pp. 198832–198844, 2020.
[7] I. Leyva-Pupo, C. Cervelló-Pastor, C. Anagnostopoulos, and
D. P. Pezaros, “Dynamic scheduling and optimal reconﬁguration of
UPF placement in 5G networks,” in Proc. 23rd Int. ACM Conf. Model.,
Anal. Simul. Wireless Mobile Syst. , 2020, pp. 103–111. [Online].
Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/3416010.3423221
[8] X. Zhang, Z. Li, C. Lai, and J. Zhang, “Joint edge server placement and
service placement in mobile-edge computing,” IEEE Internet Things J. ,
vol. 9, no. 13, pp. 11261–11274, Jul. 2022.
[9] T. Lähderanta et al., “Edge computing server placement with capacitated
location allocation,” J. Parallel Distrib. Comput. , vol. 153, pp. 130–149,
Jul. 2021. [Online]. Available: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S0743731521000605
[10] S. Wang, Y . Zhao, J. Xu, J. Yuan, and C.-H. Hsu, “Edge server placement
in mobile edge computing,” J. Parallel Distrib. Comput. , vol. 127,
pp. 160–168, May 2019. [Online]. Available: https://www.sciencedirect.
com/science/article/pii/S0743731518304398[11] C.-X. Wang, M. D. Renzo, S. Stanczak, S. Wang, and E. G. Larsson,
“Artiﬁcial intelligence enabled wireless networking for 5G and beyond:Recent advances and future challenges,” IEEE Wireless Commun. ,
vol. 27, no. 1, pp. 16–23, Feb. 2020.
[12] A. Nazi, W. Hang, A. Goldie, S. Ravi, and A. Mirhoseini,
“GAP: Generalizable approximate graph partitioning framework,” 2019,arXiv:1903.00614 .
[13] I. Demirkol, C. Ersoy, M. Caglayan, and H. Delic, “Location area
planning and cell-to-switch assignment in cellular networks,” IEEE
Trans. Wireless Commun. , vol. 3, no. 3, pp. 880–890, May 2004.
[14] L. Chen, H.-L. Liu, Z. Fan, S. Xie, and E. D. Goodman, “Modeling the
tracking area planning problem using an evolutionary multi-objective
algorithm,” IEEE Comput. Intell. Mag. , vol. 12, no. 1, pp. 29–41,
Feb. 2017.
[15] M. Bagaa, T. Taleb, and A. Ksentini, “Efﬁcient tracking area manage-
ment framework for 5G networks,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun. ,
vol. 15, no. 6, pp. 4117–4131, Jun. 2016.
[16] H. Tabassum, M. Salehi, and E. Hossain, “Fundamentals of mobility-
aware performance characterization of cellular networks: A tutorial,”
IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts. , vol. 21, no. 3, pp. 2288–2308, 3rd Quart.,
2019.
[17] R. Karmakar, G. Kaddoum, and S. Chattopadhyay, “Mobility man-
agement in 5G and beyond: A novel smart handover with adaptive
time-to-trigger and hysteresis margin,” IEEE Trans. Mobile Comput. ,
vol. 22, no. 10, pp. 5995–6010, Oct. 2023.
[18] X. Huang, J. Zong, and Y . Liu, “Mobility management for novel
cooperative two-layer satellite network,” in Proc. Int. Wireless Commun.
Mobile Comput. (IWCMC) , 2023, pp. 1275–1280.
[19] S. M. A. Zaidi, H. Farooq, A. Rizwan, A. Abu-Dayya, and A. Imran,
“A framework to address mobility management challenges in emerging
networks,” IEEE Wireless Commun. , vol. 30, no. 4, pp. 90–97, Jan. 2023.
[20] Q. Peng et al., “Mobility-aware and migration-enabled online edge user
allocation in mobile edge computing,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Web
Services (ICWS)
, 2019, pp. 91–98.
[21] L. Zhao et al., “MESON: A mobility-aware dependent task ofﬂoading
scheme for urban vehicular edge computing,” IEEE Trans. Mobile
Comput. , vol. 23, no. 5, pp. 4259–4272, May 2024.
[22] B. W. Kernighan and S. Lin, “An efﬁcient heuristic procedure for
partitioning graphs,” Bell Syst. Tech. J. , vol. 49, no. 2, pp. 291–307,
1970.
[23] D. Van den Bout and T. Miller, “Graph partitioning using annealed
neural networks,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. , vol. 1, no. 2, pp. 192–203,
1990.
[24] T. Kawamoto, M. Tsubaki, and T. Obuchi, “Mean-ﬁeld theory of graph
neural networks in graph partitioning,” 2018, arXiv:1810.11908 .
[25] D. Gao, K. Li, R. Wang, S. Shan, and X. Chen, “Multi-modal graph
neural network for joint reasoning on vision and scene text,” inProc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR) , 2020,
pp. 12743–12753.
[26] Y . Wu, J. Liu, C. Wang, and Q. Yang, “Graph attention LSTM for
load prediction of ﬁne-grained VNFs in SFC,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Commun. , 2023, pp. 4899–4904.
[27] F. Scarselli, M. Gori, A. C. Tsoi, M. Hagenbuchner, and G. Monfardini,
“The graph neural network model,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. , vol. 20,
no. 1, pp. 61–80, Jan. 2009.
[28] T. Kipf and M. Welling, “Semi-supervised classiﬁcation with graph
convolutional networks,” 2017, arXiv:1609.02907 .
[29] J. Gilmer, S. S. Schoenholz, P. F. Riley, O. Vinyals, and G. E. Dahl,
Message Passing Neural Networks . Cham, Switzerland: Springer Int.
Publ., 2020, pp. 199–214.
[30] P. Velickovic, G. Cucurull, A. Casanova, A. Romero, P. Lio, and
Y . Bengio, “Graph attention networks,” in Proc. ICLR , 2017, p. 20.
[31] S. Kekki et al., “MEC in 5G networks,” ETSI, Sophia Antipolis, France,
White Paper, 2018.
[32] “Procedures for the 5G system (5GS),” ETSI, Sophia Antipolis, France,
document TS 123 502-2021, 2021.
[33] T. Taleb and A. Ksentini, “Gateway relocation avoidance-aware network
function placement in carrier cloud,” in Proc. 16th ACM Int. Conf.
Model., Anal. Simul. Wireless Mobile Syst. , 2013, pp. 341–346.
[34] W. Hamilton, Z. Ying, and J. Leskovec, “Inductive representation
learning on large graphs,” in Proc. 31st Int. Conf. Adv. Neural Inf.
Process. Syst. , vol. 30, 2017, pp. 1025–1035.
[35] Z. Wu, S. Pan, F. Chen, G. Long, C. Zhang, and P. S. Yu, “A
comprehensive survey on graph neural networks,” IEEE Trans. Neural
Netw. Learn. Syst. , vol. 32, no. 1, pp. 4–24, Jan. 2021.
Authorized licensed use limited to: POLO BIBLIOTECARIO DI INGEGNERIA. Downloaded on December 13,2024 at 14:57:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

--- PAGE 13 ---
LIU et al.: MOBILITY-AWARE MEC PLANNING WITH A GNN-BASED GRAPH PARTITIONING FRAMEWORK 4395
[36] P. C. Sen, M. Hajra, and M. Ghosh, “Supervised classiﬁcation algorithms
in machine learning: A survey and review,” in Proc. IEM Graph Emerg.
Technol. Model. Graph. , 2020, pp. 99–111.
[37] 2022, “The world’s largest open database of cell towers,” Data Set,
OpenCellID. [Online]. Available: https://www.opencellid.org/#zoom=
16&lat=37.77889&lon=-122.41942
[38] X. Liang, J. Zhao, L. Dong, and K. Xu, “Unraveling the origin of
exponential law in intra-urban human mobility,” Sci. Rep. , vol. 3, no. 1,
p. 2983, 2013.
[39] X. Jiang, P. Hou, H. Zhu, B. Li, Z. Wang, and H. Ding, “Dynamic
and intelligent edge server placement based on deep reinforcement
learning in mobile edge computing,” Ad Hoc Netw. , vol. 145, Jun. 2023,
Art. no. 103172.
Jiayi Liu (Member, IEEE) received the Bachelor
of Science degree in electronic engineering from
Xidian University, Xi’an, China, in 2007, theMaster of Science degree in computer science from
Télécom-Bretagne, France, in 2009, and the Ph.D.
degree from Rennes 1 University, France, in 2013.Since 2014, she has been working as a Lecturerwith the School of Telecommunication Engineering
and the Guangzhou Institute of Technology, Xidian
University. Her research interests include 5/6Gnetwork, content distribution, network resource
scheduling, and AI enabled network management.
Zhongyi Xu received the B.S. degree in communica-
tion engineering from Shandong University, Weihai,China, in 2021, and the M.S. degree in communica-tion and information system from Xidian University,
Xi’an, China, in 2024. His research interests include
5G network and mobile edge computing.
Chen Wang received the Bachelor of Science
degree in computer science from Tongji University,
Shanghai, China, in 2007, the Master of Science
degree in computer science from Télécom-Bretagne,France, in 2009, and the Ph.D. degree from theNational Institutes of Science and Technology,
France, in 2013. He worked as a Research Scientist
with Bosch, China, from 2014 to 2017. Since2017, he has been working as a Research Scientistwith Huawei. His current research interests include
machine learning algorithms and AI applications.
Xuefang Liu received the B.S. degree in commu-
nication engineering from the Lanzhou Universityof Technology, China, in 1998, and the M.S. andPh.D. degrees in information and communication
systems from Xidian University, China, in 2004 and
2009, respectively. Since 1998, she has been withXidian University. During this time, she also wenton a study tour with the University of Houston
from 2016 to 2017. Her current research interest lies
in the ﬁelds of cooperative communication, contentdelivery networks, and 6G communication networks.
Xuemei Xie (Senior Member, IEEE) received the
M.S. degree in electronic engineering from Xidian
University, Xi’an, China, in 1994, and the Ph.D.
degree in electrical and electronic engineering fromThe University of Hong Kong in 2004. She is aProfessor with the School of Artiﬁcial Intelligence,
Xidian University. Her research interests are human
action recognition, object detection, scene under-standing, video analysis, deep learning, and featurerepresentation.
Guangming Shi (Fellow, IEEE) received the M.S.
degree in computer control and the Ph.D. degree
in electronic information technology from XidianUniversity, Xi’an, China, in 1988 and 2002, respec-
tively, where he was the Vice President from
2018 to 2022. He is currently the Vice Dean ofPeng Cheng Laboratory and a Professor with theSchool of Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Xidian University.
His research interests include artiﬁcial intelligence,
semantic communications, and human-computerinteraction. He was awarded the Cheung Kong
Scholar Chair Professor by the Ministry of Education in 2012. He won the
Second Prize of the National Natural Science Award in 2017. He is the Chair
of IEEE CASS Xian Chapter, a Senior Member of ACM and CCF, and aFellow of the Chinese Institute of Electronics and of IET.
Authorized licensed use limited to: POLO BIBLIOTECARIO DI INGEGNERIA. Downloaded on December 13,2024 at 14:57:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

